
[Previous](./2020-04-01-Variable-Binding.md) • [All Posts](../posts.md) • [Next](./2020-04-08-Software-Design-Pillars.md)

6 April 2020

Elijah Shadbolt

# Lexer

We have implemented a basic lexer which can read text and transform it into a sequence tokens. It currently supports a few simple features unspecific to Bun.

We chose to use the char8_t type for UTF-8 characters throughout the compiler. UTF-8 is ideal because it allows all unicode characters to appear in source code (not just ASCII), and it is optimised in memory space for ASCII characters (compared to the larger UTF-16 and UTF-32 encodings).

### Single-line comments

```
// Single Line Comments

//
// yay
//
```

### Multi Line Comments

```
/* Multi
Line
Comments */

/*
And
	/*
		Nested
	*/
Comments
*/
```

### Decimal Integer Literals

```
42
37
0999
```

### Hexadecimal Integer Literals

```
0xFF
0x3a5d
```

### Division Binary Operator

Because comments also start with a slash.

```
/
```

## API

The lexer behaves like one function, `Lex`, which reads text from a stream and transforms it to a sequence of tokens, logging error messages along the way.

The lexer's interface requries that the user create a concrete final class that extends `Bun::Lexing::Lexer`. This class shares several pure virtual member functions (abstract methods) which must be overridden and implemented. These include:

```cpp
// true if reader stream is at end of file
virtual bool VirtualEof() = 0;
// reader stream current char
virtual Char VirtualPeek() = 0;
// advance reader stream by one char
virtual void VirtualNext() = 0;

// logger handles a message being logged
virtual void VirtualLog(LogMessage log) = 0;
// lippincott function that returns a message about the current exception being handled
virtual String VirtualGetExceptionMessage();

// saves a finished token
virtual void VirtualSubmit(Token token) = 0;
```

These sandbox methods are used by the lexer when the public member function `Lex` (`void Bun::Lexing::Lexer::Lex()`) is called. In effect, instead of passing many `std::function` callback parameters to a single static function `Lex`, we can use this pattern. Also, this pattern uses one virtual table while the callback parameters would in most cases require many virtual tables.

This sandbox pattern provides flexibility for the user of the API. They could use a `stringstream` to read from memory, or a `fstream` to read from a file, or another stream of their choosing. They could log to the console, or to a file.

The lexer is coming along nicely.
